http://journals.plos.org/ploscompbiol/article?id=10.1371/journal.pcbi.1003833#pcbi.1003833-Fung1

Sketched look (xkcd filter on matplotlib) associated with a cartoonish font

Rule 10: Get the Right Tool
There exist many tools that can make your life easier when creating figures, and knowing a few of them can save you a lot of time. Depending on the type of visual you're trying to create, there is generally a dedicated tool that will do what you're trying to achieve. It is important to understand at this point that the software or library you're using to make a visualization can be different from the software or library you're using to conduct your research and/or analyze your data. You can always export data in order to use it in another tool. Whether drawing a graph, designing a schema of your experiment, or plotting some data, there are open-source tools for you. They're just waiting to be found and used. Below is a small list of open-source tools.
Matplotlib is a python plotting library, primarily for 2-D plotting, but with some 3-D support, which produces publication-quality figures in a variety of hardcopy formats and interactive environments across platforms. It comes with a huge gallery of examples that cover virtually all scientific domains (http://matplotlib.org/gallery.html).
R is a language and environment for statistical computing and graphics. R provides a wide variety of statistical (linear and nonlinear modeling, classical statistical tests, time-series analysis, classification, clustering, etc.) and graphical techniques, and is highly extensible.
Inkscape is a professional vector graphics editor. It allows you to design complex figures and can be used, for example, to improve a script-generated figure or to read a PDF file in order to extract figures and transform them any way you like.
TikZ and PGF are TeX packages for creating graphics programmatically. TikZ is built on top of PGF and allows you to create sophisticated graphics in a rather intuitive and easy manner, as shown by the Tikz gallery (http://www.texample.net/tikz/examples/all/).
GIMP is the GNU Image Manipulation Program. It is an application for such tasks as photo retouching, image composition, and image authoring. If you need to quickly retouch an image or add some legends or labels, GIMP is the perfect tool.
ImageMagick is a software suite to create, edit, compose, or convert bitmap images from the command line. It can be used to quickly convert an image into another format, and the huge script gallery (http://www.fmwconcepts.com/imagemagick/index.php) by Fred Weinhaus will provide virtually any effect you might want to achieve.
D3.js (or just D3 for Data-Driven Documents) is a JavaScript library that offers an easy way to create and control interactive data-based graphical forms which run in web browsers, as shown in the gallery at http://github.com/mbostock/d3/wiki/Gallery.
Cytoscape is a software platform for visualizing complex networks and integrating these with any type of attribute data. If your data or results are very complex, cytoscape may help you alleviate this complexity.
Circos was originally designed for visualizing genomic data but can create figures from data in any field. Circos is useful if you have data that describes relationships or multilayered annotations of one or more scales.

Chartjunk
http://junkcharts.typepad.com/
